---
layout: paper
title: "Synthesizing Designs with Inter-part Dependencies Using Hierarchical Generative Adversarial Networks"
year: "2019"
shortref: "Wei Chen and Mark Fuge <i>JMD</i> 2019"
nickname: hgan_jmd
journal: "Journal of Mechanical Design"
volume: 141
issue: 11
pages: 111403
authors: "Wei Chen and Mark Fuge"
image: /assets/images/papers/chen_hgan_jmd_2019.png
redirect_from: 
fulltext: 
pdf: /assets/pdfs/chen_hgan_jmd_2019.pdf
pdflink: 
github: "https://github.com/IDEALLab/hgan_jmd_2019"
doi: 10.1115/1.4044076
category: paper
published: true
tags: [hgan_jmd]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

# Abstract 

Real-world designs usually consist of parts with inter-part dependencies, i.e., the geometry of one part is dependent on one or multiple other parts. We can represent such dependency in a part dependency graph. This paper presents a method for synthesizing these types of hierarchical designs using generative models learned from examples. It decomposes the problem of synthesizing the whole design into synthesizing each part separately but keeping the inter-part dependencies satisfied. Specifically, this method constructs multiple generative models, the interaction of which is based on the part dependency graph. We then use the trained generative models to synthesize or explore each part design separately via a low-dimensional latent representation, conditioned on the corresponding parent part(s). We verify our model on multiple design examples with different inter-part dependencies. We evaluate our model by analyzing the constraint satisfaction performance, the synthesis quality, the latent space quality, and the effects of part dependency depth and branching factor. This paper's techniques for capturing dependencies among parts lay the foundation for learned generative models to extend to more realistic engineering systems where such relationships are widespread.




# BibTeX Citation

```
@article{chen2019hgan,
    author={Chen, Wei and Fuge, Mark},
    title={Synthesizing Designs with Inter-part Dependencies Using Hierarchical Generative Adversarial Networks},
    journal={Journal of Mechanical Design},
    volume={141},
    number={11},
    pages={111403},
    year={2019},
    publisher={American Society of Mechanical Engineers},
    doi={10.1115/1.4044076}
}
```
